
                         IOCS Reference Manual
                            Table of Contents

1.  Initialization

2.  Opening a File

3.  Dynamic Storage Allocation

4.  Cursor Position

5.  File Reading and Writing
         5.1  Reading or Writing an Element
         5.2  Reading a File Line
         5.3  Special File Format Handling

6.  File Size

7.  Erasing File Space

8.  Closing Files

9.  File Utility Operations
         9.1  Deleting a File
         9.2  Renaming a File

10. Terminal Input and Output
        10.1  Terminal Input
        10.2  Terminal Output

11. Exception Handling
        11.1  Interrupts
        11.2  Errors

12. Monitor Calls
$
#1
    This document describes the PDP-10 implementation of the input/
    output control system, IOCS, which provides SIMPL procedures for:

    * Opening and closing files.  Sequential or direct access, word or
      character organization, and several file types are available.  A
      file number is returned when a file is opened.

    * Reading and writing on a file specified by file number.  Direct
      access is achieved through cursor manipulation at the element
      (word or character) level.

    * Core storage allocation.

    * Utility operations (such as deleting and renaming) on files
      specified by name.

    * Terminal input with or without editing specified by control
      characters.  Terminal output of a character or string.

    * Error and interrupt handling.

    * Execution of monitor calls.


    Please direct any comments on IOCS to Caroline Diehl.
$



1  Initialization

     All files associated with IOCS are currently located in the
     directory CD.

     The file IOCSU.SIM must precede any SIMPL program using IOCS.
     For example, to use IOCS with PROG.SIM:

     DEB (CD)IOCS,(CD)IOCSU+PROG

     IOCSU contains FIND statements and macro definitions associated
     with IOCS.

     IOCS must be initialized with the call IOCS(nbufs), where
     nbufs is the number of buffers to be allocated for DIRECT
     (dump) mode file operations, as explained below.  If DIRECT
     mode is never used, nbufs may be 0.

2  Opening a File

     OPEN(fid, mode+type+org, errlabel:, nsbufs)

     The parameters are explained in more detail below.  Briefly,

     fid is either the address of the first word of the string
          identifying the file, or the negative of the
          address of a table in which information identifying
          the file has already been stored in the form required
          by OPEN.

     mode+type+org are the file mode, type and organization.  The
          words used to designate these descriptors are macros
          defined in IOCSU.

     errlabel: is the label branched to if an error is encountered.
          For details, see 12.2 Errors.

     nsbufs is the number of buffers to be used in accessing a
          sequential file; OPEN is called without this argument if the
          file is not sequential.

     OPEN returns the file number.

     2.1  File identifier

          If the fid parameter is 0 or positive, it is assumed to
          be the address of the first word of the string identifying
          the file (by name and whatever else applies, such as
          user name or project-programmer number).  A procedure
          named SETFID is called within OPEN to examine the
          string, check that is is a valid file identifier, and
          store whatever information is required by OPEN in order
          to open the file.  The user may, however, call SETFID
          himself, specifying an address at which to store the
          file identifying information, and then later pass the
          negative of that address as the fid parameter to
          OPEN, which recognizes a negative fid as such.

               SETFID (fidtbl, @ptr, extdef, seterr: )

          The pointer ptr must be a character pointer to one
          character before the first character of the file
          identifier.  The @ is used with the parameter and
          argument so that the pointer will advance in the
          calling program as it advances within SETFID.
          Extdef is the extension default (0 if none), used
-         if the file identifying string does not specify an
          extension.

          SETFID terminates on any character that is illegal in a
          file identifier, including a blank, and goes to the
          label seterr if a valid file identifier is not found.
          Otherwise, the proper file information is stored and
          ptr is left at one position before the terminator.

          Examples:

          FN1-OPEN("TKFS",DIRECT+UPDATE+CHARACTER,EROUT)

          SETFID(FIDTB,@LPTR,F4EXT,SETERR)
          ..
          ..
          FIN2-OPEN(-FIDTB,SEQUEN+OUTPUT+WORD,EROUT,2)

          Included in IOCSU are:

          FIND FIDP()      The address at which SETFID stores
                           the file identifying information
                           (whether called by the user or by
                           OPEN).
          WPF              The number of words
                           written by SETFID at fidtbl.
          PPNARG(fidtbl)   Macros defining elements of fidtbl:
          NAMARG(fidtbl)   the project programmer number, file
          EXTARG(fidtbl)   name in SIXBIT, file extension, priv-
          PRVARG(fidtbl)   ilege bits, file size in words, address
          USRNAM(fidtbl)   of user name, and EXTQ, which is 1 if
          FILSIZ(fidtbl)   an extension was specified in the file
          EXTQ(fidtbl)     identifying string, 0 if the extension
                           default (extdef) was used.  Each macro
                           references the entire word containing
                           the specified parameter; other bits in
                           the word may be set, as in the right
                           half of EXTARG.  Refer to the DEC de-
                           scription of the extended argument
                           table for details.



          Note, then, that after the first OPEN in the above ex-
          amples, the user can move WPF words from FIDP to a local
          array, and later reference that file by the negative of
          the array address.


     2.2  File mode

     a.  DIRECT

         When DIRECT is specified, the cursor position may be set
         to indicate where elements are to be read or written on
         the FILE.

         The PDP-10 unbuffered (dump) data mode is used in this
         case.

     b.  SEQUEN

         When SEQUEN mode is specified, only sequential reading
         and writing is permitted.  Thus, the cursor position can
         not be set (but it can be accessed) when this mode is
         used, and the file type cannot be UPDATE (see 2.3).
         Each file has its own set of buffers, or buffer
         ring; the user specifies the number of buffers
         desired for a particular file (nsbufs).  The PDP-10 buffered
         data mode is used in this case.

     2.3  File type


     a.  INPUT

         1.  File must exist
         2.  File cannot be written on (to allow simultaneous access
             by more than one user).

     b.  OUTPUT or OUTMSG

         1.  File need not exist
         2.  If file exists, its previous contents are disregarded
             and will be destroyed at the time the file is closed.
         3.  If DIRECT mode, file can be read from as well as
             written on.

         OUTMSG is identical to OUTPUT except that a NEW FILE
         or OLD FILE message is printed.  If the message is not
         confirmed with a carriage return or line feed, the
         file is not opened.  NOTE:  If the OPEN is aborted
         with an escape character, the error return is still
         taken; the usual escape handling is bypassed (see Exception
         Handling, below).

     c.  UPDATE (DIRECT mode only)

         Same as OUTPUT except that if file exists, its previous
         contents are preserved except where overwritten.

     Note:  The only type protected from read access is
            SEQUEN OUTPUT/OUTMSG.


     2.4  File organization

         May be WORD or CHARACTER.  Designates what size "elements"
         will be read or written by the I/O procedures.

     2.5  File number

         The file number, or fn, is used to identify the file in
         subsequent I/O operations.

         On the PDP-10, the channel number serves as the fn.
         The range of channel numbers used is FNMIN (DEF'd as 1)
         to FNMAX (DEF'd as 15),.  The fn TEL, indicating the ter-
         minal, is DEF'd as FNMIN-1, and is returned by OPEN if
         the file name specified is any subset (from the beginning)
         of the string TELETYPE.

         Note: Opening the terminal in DIRECT mode or WORD organization
               is assumed to be an error.

3  Dynamic Storage Allocation

     The following procedures may be used to allocate contiguous
     blocks of core storage.  IOCS uses them in allocating
     file buffers.

     %BLOCK(nblks,val, errlabel:)

     returns the address of a storage area consisting
     of the specified number of blocks (nblks).  A block
     consists of 131 words for this implementation.  Val is the
     value to be stored throughout the area.  If there is not
     enough core to provide the specified number of blocks, a
     branch to errlabel is made.

     %RELEASE(nblks,adr)

     releases the specified number of blocks starting at the
     specified address, making the area again available to
     BLOCK.

4  Cursor Position

     CP(fn) is a procedure that returns the cursor position on
     file fn.  It may be called whether the file mode is DIRECT
     or SEQUEN.

     SETCP(fn,p) sets the cursor position on file fn to p.  It may
     be called only if the file mode is DIRECT.

     When a file is opened, its cursor position is initialized
     to 0.  The cursor is advanced one position with every read
     or write of an element on the file.

5  File Reading and Writing

   5.1  Reading or Writing an Element

     R(fn) returns the value of the element (word or character) at
     the current cursor position on file fn.  The end-of-file exit
     (as described under Exception Handling, below) is taken when
     an attempt is made to read beyond the file end.  In the case
     of a SEQUEN CHARACTER file, any trailing EOLITS in the last
     word of the file will be read.

     W(fn,val) writes the specified element value at the current cursor
     position on file fn and returns the value written.

     A carriage return is written after every line feed
     and vice versa.  This additional action may be suppressed
     through the use of WX(fn,val), which writes exactly the value
     specified, and nothing more.

     The R, W, and WX procedures may be called with the fn TEL
     indicating terminal input or output of a character (see Ter-
     minal Input and Output below).

   5.2  Reading a File Line

     The GETLINE(fn) procedure may be used to read a line from
     the terminal (as explained below) or from the file whose num-
     ber is fn.  When reading a file line, GETLINE ignores EOLITS,
     stores CARRET followed by LNFEED as CARRET, and LNFEED
     followed by CARRET as LNFEED, and terminates on a carriage
     return, ignoring any characters that may lie between the
     last line terminator and the file end.  The line is stored
     with an EOLIT after the terminating character, and a double-
     word value is returned:  a pointer to one character before
     the first character of the line, and the number of char-
     acters stored (excluding the EOLIT).  The buffer in which
     the line is stored is GLOBALLY declared (as FREE) and is also
     used during GETLINE(TEL) calls.

     As described below in the description of GETLINE(TEL), the
     SET.TERM procedure may be used to specify another line ter-
     minator in addition to carriage return.


5.3  Special File Format Handling

     The following procedures have been included in IOCS
     in an attempt to handle files specially formatted with
     DEC line numbers.

     PLNCHK(fn)

     where fn is the number of a character-organized file just
     opened, returns 1 if the first word on file fn is a DEC
     line number (bit 35 on), else returns 0.

     PLNW(fn, addr, wdcnt)

     may be used for writing DEC line numbers on a character-
     organized file.  The file number is fn, addr is the address
     at which wdcnt words are stored that contain the line
     number to be written.  EOLITs are written to the next word
     position on fn, where the line number is then written
     (bit 35 set in each word) and followed by a tab character.

6  File Size

     The procedure SIZE(fn) returns the current size of the specified
     file, in elements (characters or words, depending on the
     organization of fn).

     a.  DIRECT mode

         The size is calculated as the highest position of the cursor
         (at which I/O was done) up to the time the size is requested,
         or the size of the file at OPEN time, whichever is greater.


     b.  SEQUEN mode

         The SIZE of a SEQUEN INPUT CHARACTER file is the
         number of words in the file multiplied by CHARS.PER.WORD.

         The SIZE of a SEQUEN OUTPUT file is simply CP(fn).

7  Freeing File Space

     ERASE(fn, CPI, CPF)

     The file mode must be DIRECT; the file type may not be INPUT.

     Zeroes are written in the specified positions.

     The position corresponding to the value of SIZE(fn)-1 is that
     of the last element.  If CPF is greater than SIZE(fn)-1 it is
     set to SIZE(fn)-1, so that a very large CPF will erase up to
     and including the last element of fn.  Also in this case, the
     cursor is left at position CPI and SIZE(fn) is reduced accordingly.
     If CPF is less than SIZE(fn)-1 (that is, before the last
     element), ERASE leaves the cursor at CPF+1.

8  Closing Files

8.1  Closing a File

     CLOSE(fn)

     If fn is TEL, a RETURN is executed.

8.2  Closing All Files

     CLOSE.ALL closes all files.

9  File Utility Operations

   The fid parameter is as described for OPEN (see 2.1) but may
   not designate the terminal.

     9.1  Deleting a File

          DELETE(fid, errlabel:)

     9.2  Renaming a File

          RENAME(old fid, new fid, errlabel:)

10  Terminal Input and Output

     10.1  Terminal Input


     10.1.1  Without Editing

             GET

             reads a character from the terminal.  The system
             echoes a line feed after a carriage return but not vice
             versa.  Any pending output spaces (see Terminal Output,
             below) are printed when GET is called.

             If a file name is passed to OPEN that is any subset
             (from the beginning) of the string TELETYPE, the
             special file number TEL is returned.  When this
             file number passed to the R procedure, a GET is
             performed.

     10.1.2  With Editing

             The GETLINE(fn) procedure, when called with the
             argument TEL, reads a line of terminal input,
             performing editing as specified by control characters,
             stores the line in a buffer with an EOLIT after the
             line terminator (carriage return), and returns a double-
             word value: a pointer to one character before the first
             character of the line, and the number of characters
             stored (excluding the EOLIT).  GETLINE stores CARRET
             followed by LNFEED as CARRET, and LNFEED followed by
             CARRET as LNFEED.

             Certain editing characters require an "old" or "image"
             line in order to be meaningful; the image line is
             normally assumed to be the previous line read.  At
             times it may be necessary to alter this - to explicitly
             store characters into the image line buffer.  Thus, this
             buffer (named IMAGE) is GLOBALly declared (may be
             accessed through FIND by the IOCS user).  It is based
             at 0 and is large enough to hold 257 characters (256
             positions for line characters and one for EOLIT).
             Note that the last character of the image line must
             be followed by an EOLIT; an EOLIT alone indicates that
             there is no image line. (IOCS initialization includes
             the storing of an EOLIT in IMAGE.)

             GETLINE begins by moving the contents of the IMAGE buffer
             to a buffer of the same size, clears IMAGE with EOLITS,
             and then stores the new user input into IMAGE, refer-
             encing the old line when necessary.  The buffer to
             which the IMAGE line is moved is used only within
             GETLINE and may be used by the IOCS user between
             GETLINE calls if desired; thus, it too is GLOBALLY
             declared (as FREE) .  Note:  FREE is also the buffer
             in which GETLINE stores a line read from a file (see 5.2).

             SET.TERM(TERMCH)

             This procedure may be called to specify that GETLINE
             should recognize not only a carriage return as a line
             terminator, but also the special character TERMCH.
             (This applies to GETLINE from either TEL or a file).
             IOCS initialization includes the call SET.TERM(EOLIT),
             indicating that carriage return is the only terminator.

             SET.PRMPT(%PROMPT)

             The procedure passed by SET.PRMPT is called within
             GETLINE(TEL), when GETLINE is first called and after
             a control Q or a control Y, to print prompting char-
             acters (such as a "glitch" mark) on thminal.  IOCS
             initializes the prompt procedure to a procedure that
             prints nothing.

     10.2  Terminal Output

     10.2.1  Character Output

             PUT(char)

             prints the specified character on the terminal (and
             returns it).

             PUT follows a carriage return by a line feed (and vice
             versa), and prints control characters other than control
             I, J, L and M as & followed by the corresponding
             alphabetic character.  To allow for straight
             printout of a control character, of a carriage
             return without a line feed or vice versa, the
             procedure PUTX(char) is provided, which prints only
             the character specified.

             PUTC(char) is equivalent to PUT(char) except that
             control I and control L are included among the
             control characters printed in & format.


             During terminal output, blanks are printed not when
             requested, but only when it is discovered that a printing
             character will follow.  In other words, a count is kept of
             spaces pending, and the spaces are printed only if the
             output of a printing character is requested before the
             next return of the carriage, which resets the count to
             zero.  Thus trailing spaces are never printed.

             If desired by the IOCS user, PUT(char) can also be called
             through W(TEL,char), and PUTX(char) through WX(TEL,char).

     10.2.2  String Output

             PRINT(addr)

             Calls PUT to print the string of characters starting
             at the specified address, up to but not including the
             EOLIT character.

             MSG(addr)

             is the same as PRINT except that every $ in the string
             represents a carriage return and every   indicates that
             the next character specifies the control character to
             be printed using PUTX.  Thus MSG(" GHELLO$") prints HELLO
             preceded by a control G (to ring the bell) and followed
             by a carriage return.

             PRINTC (addr) may be used to print the string at
             addr using PUTC.

11  Exception Handling

    11.1  Interrupts (ALT MODE, ESC)

          In the GLOBAL variable ALTLOC the user must store the
          label to which IOCS should branch when an ALT MODE or
          ESC is typed.  IOCS initialization sets ALTLOC to a
          location at which a CLOSE.ALL and EXIT are done.

          The OFFALT and ONALT procedures may be used to disable and
          enable the ALT MODE.  IOCS knows enough to ignore nested
          OFFALT/ONALT pairs; for example,

          %PROC.A
          OFFALT;...;PROC.B;...;ONALT;RETURN
          END PROC.A

          %PROC.B
          OFFALT;...;ONALT;RETURN
          END PROC.B

          The OFFALT and ONALT calls within PROC.B will not
          actually turn the ALT MODE on and off, since it was
          already disabled when PROC.B was called, and clearly
          should not be enabled until the ONALT within PROC.A
          is encountered.  This is accomplished by means of
          checking the ALT MODE level (ALTLEV), which is initialized
          to 0, incremented by 1 within OFFALT, and decremented
          by 1 within ONALT.  OFFALT always increments ALTLEV but
          actually disables the ALT MODE only if ALTLEV is 0 when
          OFFALT is called.  Similarly, ONALT actually enables the
          ALT MODE only if it encounters an ALTLEV of 1.  Note that
          ONALT will not decrement an ALTLEV of 0, so that redundant
          ONALTs are completely ignored.

          The ONALT.C procedure clears all but 1 of any stacked
          OFFALTs and executes an ONALT that then definitely enables
          the ALT MODE.  This might be used, for example, in a
          procedure that is called at different ALTLEVs but
          always wants the ALT MODE enabled rather than just the level
          decremented; this would likely be an exception handling
          procedure that would not RETURN but rather go to a label.

          Note:  If an ALT MODE is typed while the GETLINE procedure
                 is in progress, IOCS restores the contents of the
                 image buffer at the time GETLINE was called, so that
                 any characters typed before the ALT MODE are ignored
                 and do not interfere with the former image line.  A
                 branch to the label stored in ALTLOC is then made as
                 usual.

    11.2  Errors

          As stated above, several of the IOCS procedures have a
          parameter specifying a label to be branched to in case an
          error is encountered.  At that lable, the GLOBAL variable
          ERRNUM may be referenced to describe the exact nature of
          of the error; IOCSU provides a list of ERRNUM value DEFs,
          their meanings, and the procedures in which they may occur.

          Errors that occur during operations on file fn, including
          end-of-file in reading a DIRECT file beyond the last ele-
          ment or a SEQUEN file past the last word, cause IOCS
          to branch to the error label previously set using the
          procedure SETRWE (fn, lab:).  If SETRWE has not been called
          explicitly by the user previous to the error, the error
          label specified at OPEN time is used (since OPEN calls
          SETRWE).  SETRWE returns the error label last specified 
          for file fn.

          Note that upon an error return from IOCS, it cannot be
          determined whether alt modes are enabled.  To be sure
          that they are, the user must call ONALT.C.

          CLOBUF may be called to clear the output buffer;
          CLIBUF to clear the input buffer.

12  Monitor Calls

    A monitor programmed operator may be called on the PDP-10 using
    the procedure:

    %EXU (code, acc, addr, skplab)

    where code is the operation code, acc and addr are the contents
    of the accumulator and address fields, and skplab is the label 
    to which EXU branches if the skip return is taken.  If the
    non-skip return is taken, EXU returns.  The last argument
    may be omitted in calls to UUOs which never skip.  For example,

    EXU(OCT 47, OCT 16, OCT 44, DONE)

    executes a CALLI 16, 44 (or TMPCOR) UUO and branches to the de-
    clared label DONE if the skip (in this case, normal) return is
    taken.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
«