

CHAPTER 7 - MONITOR ALGORITHMS


7.l  JOB SCHEDULING

The number of jobs that may be run simultaneously must be specified
in creating a PDP-l0 Timesharing Monitor.  Up to l27 jobs may
be specified.  Each user accessing the system is assigned a job
number.

In multiprogramming system all jobs reside in core, and the
scheduler decides what jobs should run.  In a swapping syste,
jobs exist on an external storage device (usually disk or dum)
as well as in core.  The scheduler decides not only what job is
to run, but also when a job is to be swapped out onto the disk
(drum) or brought back into core.

In a swapping system, jobs are retained in queues of varying
priorities that reflect the status of the jobs at any given
mement.  Each job number possible in the system resides in
only one queue at any time.  A job may be in one of the following
queues:

a.  Run queues - for runnable jobs waiting to execute.  (There
    are three run queues of different levels of priorities).

b.  I/O wait queue - for jobs waiting while doing I/O.

c.  I/O wait satisfied queue - for jobs waiting to run after
    finishing I/O.

d.  Sharable device wait queue - for jobs waiting to use sharable
    devices.

e.  Teletype wait queue - for jobs waiting for input or output
    on the user's console.

f.  Teletype wait satisfied queue - for jobs that completed a
    Teletype operation and are awaiting action.

g.  Stop queue - for processes that have been completed or 
    aborted by an error and are awaiting a new command for
    further action.

h.  Null queue - for all jobs numbers that are inactive
    (unassigned).

Each queue is addressed through a table.  The position of a queue
address in a table represents the priority of the queue with
respect to the other queues.  Within each queue, the position
of a job determines its priority with respect to the other jobs
in the same queue.  The status of a job is changed when it is
placed in a different queue.

Each job, when it is assigned to run, is given a quantum time.
When the quantum time expires, the job ceases to run and moves to
a lower priority run queue.  The activities of the job currently
running may cause it to move out of the run queue and enter one
of the wait queues.  For example:  when a currently running job
begins input for a DECtape, it is placed in the I/O wait queue,
and the input is begun.  A second job is set to run while the
input of the first job proceeds.  If the second job then decides
to access a DECtape for an I/O operation, it is stopped because
the DECtape control is busy, and it is put in the queue for
jobs waiting to access the DECtape control.  A third job is
set to run.  The input operation of the first job finishes,
making the DECtape control available to the second job.  The
I/O operation of the second job is initiated, and the job is
transferred from the device wait queue to the I/O wait queue.
The first job is transferred from the I/O wait queue to the
highest priority run queue.  This permits the first job to
preempt the running of the third job.  When the quantum time
of the first job becomes zero, it is moved into the second
run queue, and the third job runs again until the second job
completes its I/O operations.

Data transfers also use the scheduler to permit the user to
overlap computation with data transmission.  In unbuffered modes,
the user supplies an address of a command list containing 
pointers to relative locations in the user area to and from
which data is to be transferred.  When the transfer is
initiated, the job is scheduled into an I/O wait queue where it
remains until the device signals the scheduler that the entire
transfer has been completed.

In buffered modes, each buffer contains a use bit to prevent
the user and the device from using the same buffer at the same
time (refer to Paragraph 4.l0.3).  If the user overtakes the
device and requires the buffer currently being used by the device
as his next buffer, the user's job is scheduled into an I/O
wait queue.  When the device finishes using the buffer, the
device calls the scheduler to reactivate the job.  If the device
overtakes the user, the device is stopped at the end of the
buffer and is restarted when the user finishes with the buffer.

Scheduling occurs at each clock tick (l/60th or l/50 or a
second) or may be forced at monitor level between clock ticks
if the current job becomes blocked (unrunnable).  The asynchronous
swapping algorithm is also called at each clock tick and has the
task of bringing a job from disk into core.  This function 
depdns on

a.  The core shuffling routine, which consolidates unused areas
    in core to make sufficient room for the incoming job.

b.  The swapperk which creates additional room in core by
    transferring jobs from core to disk.

Therefore, when the scheduler is selecting the next job to be
run, the swapper is bringing the next job to be run into core.
The transfer from disk to core takes place while the central
processor continues computation for the previous job.


7.2  PROGRAM SWAPPING

Program swapping is performed by the monitor on one or more
units of the system independent of the file structures that
may also use the units.  Swapping space is allocated and deallocated
in clusters of lK words (Exactly), this size is the increment
size of the memory relocation and protection mechanism.
Directories are not maintained, and retrieval information is
retained in core.  Most user segments are written onto the
swapping units as contiguous units.   Swapping time and
retrieval information is, therefore, minimized.  Segments are
always read completely from the swapping unit into core with
one I/O operation.  The swapping space on all units appears as
a single system file, SWAP.SYS, in directory SYS in each file
structure.  This file is protected from all but privileged
programs by the standard file protection mechansim (refer to
Paragraph 6.2.3).

The reentrant capability reduces the demands on core memory,
swapping space, swapping channel, and storage channel; however,
to reduce the use of the storage channel, copies of sharable
segments are kept on the swapping device.  This increases the
demand for swapping space.  To prevent the swapping space from
being filled by user's files and to keep swapped segments
from being fragmented, swapping space is preallocated when the
file structure is refreshed.  The monitor dynamically achieves
the space-time balance by assuming that there is no shortage
of swapping space.  Swapping space is never used for anything
except segments, and the monitor keeps a single copy of as many
segments as possible in this space.  (The maximum number of
segments that may be kept may be increased by individual
installations but is always at least as great as the number of
jobs plus one).  If a sharable segment on the swapping space is
currently unused, it is called a dormant segment.  An idle
segment is a sharable segment that is not used by users in core;
however, at least one swapped-out user must be using the segment
or it would be a dormant segment.

Swapping disregards the grouping of similar units into file
structures; therefore, swapping is done on a unit basis rather 
than a file structure basis.  The units for swapping are grouped
in a sorted order, referred to as the active swapping list.  
The total virtual core, which the system can allocate to users,
is equal to the total swapping space preallocated on all units
in the active swapping list.  In computing virtual core, sharable
segments count only once, and dormant segments do not count at
all.  The monitor does not allow more virtual core to be granted
than the system has capacity to handle.

When the system is started, the monitor reads the home blocks
on all the units that it was generated to handle.  The monitor
determines from the home blocks which units are members of the
active swapping list.  This list may be changed at once-only
timme.  The change does not require refreshing of the file
structures, as long as swapping space was preallocated on the
units when they were refreshed.  All of the units with swapping
space allocated need not appear in the active swapping list.
For example:  a drum and disk pack system should have swapping
space allocated on both drum and disk packs.  Then, if the drum
becomes inoperable, the disk packs may be used for swapping
without refreshing.

Users cannot proceed when virtual core is exhausted; therefore,
FILSER is designed to handle a variety of disks as swapping
media.  The system administrator allocates additional
swapping space on slower disks and virtually eliminates the
possibility of exhausting virtual core; therefore, in periods
of heavy demand, swapping is slower for segments that must
be swapped on the slower devices.  It is also undesirable to
allow dormant segments to take up space on high-speed units.
This forces either fragmentation on fast units or swapping on
slow units; therefore, the allocation of swapping space
is important to overall system efficiency.

The swapping allocator is responsible for assigning space for
the segment the swapper wants to swap out.  It must decide:

a.  Onto which unit to swap the segment.
b.  Whether to fragment the unit if not enough contiguous
    space is available.
c.  Whether to make room by deleting a dormant segment.
d.  Whether to use a slower unit.

The units in the active swapping list are divided into swapping
classes, usually according to device speed.  For simplicity,
the monitor assumes that all the units of class 0 are first
followed by all the units of class l.  Swapping classes are
defined when the file structures are refreshed, and may be
changed at once-only time.

When attempting to allocate space to swap out a low or high
segment, the monitor performs the following:

   Step                       Procedure

    l         The monitor looks for contiguous space on one of
              the units of the first swapping class.

    2         The monitor looks for noncontiguous space on one
              of the units in the same class.

    3         The monitor checks whether deleting one or more
              dormant segments would yield enough contiguous or
              noncontiguous space.

If all of these measures fail, the monitor repeats the process
on the next swapping class in the active swapping list.  If
none of the classes yield enough space, the swapper begins again
and deletes enough dormant segments to fragment the segment acros
units and classes.  When a deleted segment is needed again, it
is retrieved from the storage device.


7.3  DEVICE OPTIMIZATION

7.3.l  Concepts

Each I/O operation on a unit consists of two steps:  positioning
and data transferring.  To perform I/O, the unit must be positioned,
unless it is already on a cylinder or is a non-positioning device.
To position a unit, the controller cannot be performing a data
transfer.  If the controller is engaged in a data transfer, the
positioning operation of moving the arm to the desired cylinder
cannot begin until the data transfer is complete.

The controller ensures that the arms have actually moved to the
correct cylinder.  This check is callec verification, and the time
required is fixed by hardware.  If verification fails, the 
controller interrupts the processor, and the software recalibrates
the positioner by moving it to a fixed place and beginning again.
When verification is complete, the controller reads the sector
headers to find the proper sector on which to perfrom the operation.
This operation is called searching.  Finally, the data is trans-
ferred to or from the desired sectors.  To understand the optimi-
zation, the transfer operation includes verification, searching,
and actual transfer.  The time from the initiation of the
transfer operation to the actual beginning of the transfer
is called the latency time.  The channel is busy with the controller
for the entire transfer time; therefore, it is important for
the software to minimize the latency time.

The FILSER code, a routine that queues disk requests and makes
optimization decisions, handles any number of channels and
controllers and up to eight units for each controller.
Optimization is designed to keep:

a.  As many channels as possible performing data transfers at
    the same time.

b.  As many units positioning on all controllers, which are not
    already in position for a data transfer.

Several constraints are imposed by the hardware.  A channel can
handle only one data transfer on one control at a time.  Further-
more, the control can handle a data transfer on only one of its
units at a time.  However, the other units on the control can
be positioning while a data transfer is taking place provided 
the positioning commands were issued prior to the data transfer.
Positioning requests for a unit on a controller, which is busy
doing a data transfer for another of its units, ust be queued
until the data transfer is finished.  When a positioning
command is given to a unit through a controller, the controller 
is busy for only a few microseconds; therefore, the software
can issue a number of positioning commands to different units
as soon as a data transfer is complete.  All units have only
positioning mechanism that reaches each point; therefore,
only one positioning operation can be performed on a unit
at the same time.  All other positioning requests for a unit
must be queued.

The software keeps a state code in memory for each active
file, unit, controller, and channel, to remember the status
of the hardware.  Reliability is increased because the software
does not depend on the status information of the hardware.  
The state of a unit is as follows:

   I       Idle; no positions or transfers waiting or being
           performed.

   SW      Seek Wait; unit is waiting for control to become idle
           so that it can initiate positioning (refer to 
           Paragraph 6.2).

   S       Seek; unit is positioning in response to a SEEK UUO
           no transfer of data follows.

   PW      Position Wait; unit is waiting for control to become
           idle so that it can initiate positioning.

   P       Position; unit is positioning; transfer of data
           follows although not necessarily on this controller.

   TW      Transfer Wait; unit is in position and is waiting for
           the controller/channel to become idle so that it can
           transfer data.

   T       Transfer; unit is transferring; the controller and
           channel are busy performing the operation.

Table 7-l lists the possible states for files, units, controllers
and channels.

                           Table 7-l
                         Software States


        File*       Unit       Controller      Channel
        ----        ----       ----------      -------

        I           I              I              I
                    SW
                    S

        PW          PW
        P           P
        TW          TW
        T           T              T              T

   * Cannot be in S or SW state because SEEKs are ignored if
     the unit is not idle.


7.3.2  Queuing Strategy

When an I/O request for a unit is made by a user program because
of an INPUT or OUTPUT UUO, one of several things can happen
at UUO level before control is returned to the buffer-strategy
module in UUOCON, which may, in turn, pass control back to the
user without rescheduling.  If an I/O request requires positioning
of the unit, either the request is added to the end of the
position-wait queue for the unit if the control or unit is busy,
or the positioning is initiated immediately.  If the request does
not require positioning, the data is transferred immediately.
If the channel is busy, the request is added to the end of the
transfer-wait queue for the channel.  The control gives the
processor an interrupt after each phase is completed.  Optimization
occurs at interrupt level when a position-done or transfer-done
interrupt occurs.


7.3.2.l  Position-Done Interrupt Optimization - The following
action occurs only if a transfer-done interrupt does not
occur first.  Data transfer is started on the unit unless
the channel is busy transferring data for some other unit or
control.  If the channel is busy, the request goes to the end
of the transfer-wait queue for that channel.


7.3.2.2  Transfer-Done Interrupt Optimization - When a 
transfer-done interrupt occurs, all the position-done interrupts
inhibited during the data transfer are processed for the controller,
and the requests are placed at the end of the transfer-wait
queue for the channel.  All units on the controller are then
scanned.  The requests in the position-wait queues on each unit
are scanned to see the request nearest the current cylinder.
Positioning is begun on the unit of the selected request.  All
requests in the transfer-wait queue for all units on the channel
that caused the interrupt are then scanned and the latency time
is measured.  The request with the shortest latency time is
selected, and the new transfer begins.


7.3.3  Fairness Considerations

When the system selects the best talk to run, users making 
requests to distant parts of the disk may not be serviced for
a long tim.e  The disk software is designed to make a fair
decision for a fixed percentage of time.  Every n decisions the
disk software selects the requests at the front of the position
wait or transfer-wait queue and processes it, because that
request has been waiting the longest.  The value of n is set
to l0 (decimal) and may be changed by redefining symbols with
MONGEN (see MONITR.OPR).


7.3.4  Channel Command Chaining

7.3.4.l  Buffered Mode - Disk accesses are reduced by using
the chaining feature of the data channel.  Prior to reading a
block in buffered mode, the device independent routine checks
to see if there is another empty buffer, and if the next relative
block within the file is a consee logical block within
the unit.  If both checks are true, FILSER creates a command
list to read two or more consecutive blocks into scattered
core buffers.  Corresponding decisions are made when writing
data in buffered mode, and, if possible, two or more separate
buffers are written in one operation.  The command chaining
decision is not made when a request is put into a position-wait
or transfer-wait queue; instead, it is postponed until the
operation is performed, thus increasing the chances that the
user program will have more buffers available for input or
output.


7.3.4.2  Unbuffered Mode - Unbuffered modes do not use channel
chaining, and therefore, read or write on ecommand word at a
time.  Each command word begins at the beginning of a l28-word
block.

If a command word does not contain an even multiple of l28
words, the remaining words of t-e last block are not read, if
reading, and are written with zeroes, if writing.


7.4  MONITOR ERROR HANDLING

The monitor detects a number of errors.  If a hardware error is
detected, the monitor repeats the operation three times.
If the failure occurs four times in a row, it is classified
as a hard error.  If the operation succeeds after failing
one to three times, it is a soft error.


7.4.1  Hardware Detected Errors

Hardware detected errors are classified either as device
errors or as data errors.  A device error indicates a mal-
function of the controller or channel.  A data error indicates
that the hardware parity did not check or a search for a sector
header either did not succeed or had bad parity (the user's data
is probably bad).

A device error sets the IODERR bit in the channel status word,
and a data error sets the IODTER bit.

Disk units may have imperfect surfaces; therefore, a special
non-timesharing diagnostic program, MAP, is provided to
initially find all the bad blocks on a specified unit.  The
logical disk addresses of any bad regions of one or more bad
blocks are recorded in the bad allocation table (BAT) block on
the unit.  The timesharing monitor allocates all storage for
files; therefore, it uses the BAT block to avoid allocating 
blocks that have previously proven bad.  The MAP program writes
two copies of the BAT block because the BAT block might be 
destroyed.  If the MAP program is not used, the monitor discovers
the bad regions when it tries to use them and adds this information
to the BAD block.  However, the first user of the bad region loses.
that part of his data.

A hard data error usually indicates a bad surface; therefore,
the monitor never returns the bad region to free storage.
This results in the bad region causing an error only once.  The
bad unit and the logical disk address are stored in the retrieval
information block (RIB) of the file when the file is CLOSEd or
RESET and the extent of the bad region is determined.  The origin
and length of the bad region is stored in the bad allocation
table (BAT) block.


7.4.2  Software Detected Errors

The monitor makes a number of software checks on itself.  It
checks the folded checksum (refer to Appendix I) computed for the
first word of every group and stored in the retrieval pointer.
The monitor also checks for in9onsistencies when comparing
locations in the retrieval information block with expected values
(filename, filename extension, project-programmer number, special
code, logical block number).  The monitor checks for incon-
sistencies in the storage allocation table block when comparing
the number of free clusters expected with the number of zeroes.
A checksum error or an inconsistency error in the SAT block or
RIB normally indicates that the monitor is reading the wrong
block.  When these errors occur, the monitor sets the improper
mode error bit (IOIMPM) in the user channel status word and
returns control to the user program.


7.5  DIRECTORIES

7.5.l  Order of Filenames

The names of newly created files are appended to the directory
if the directory does not contain more than 64 filenames.  If
the directory contains more than 64 filenames, a second block
is used for the new filenames.  When filenames are deleted from
the first blcok, entries from the second block are not moved
into the first.  When additional new files are created, their
,names are added to the end of the first block of the directory
instead of the end of the directory.  Thus, the order of the
filenames in the directory may not be according to the date of
careation.


7.5.2  Directory Searches

Table space in core memory is used to reduce directory searching
times.  The JBTPPB table contains pointers to a list of four-
word blocks for the user's project-programmer number, one block
for each file structure on which the user has a UFD.

Four-word name and access blocks contain copies of LOOKUP
information for recently-accessed files and may reduce disk
accesses to one directory read for a LOOKUP on a recently-
active file.  Recent LOOKUP failures are also kept in core,
but are deleted when space is needed.


7.6  PRIORITY INTERRUPT ROUTINES

7.6.l  Channel Interrupt Routines

Each of the seven PI channels has two absolute locations associated
with it in memory:  40+2n and 4l+2n, where n is a channel number
(l-7).  When an interrupt occurs on a channel, control is immediately
transferred to the first of the two associated locations (unless
an interrupt on a higher priority channel is being processed).
For fast service of a single device, the first location contains
either a BLKI or BLKO instruction.  For service of more than one
device on the same channel, the first location contains a JSR
to location CHn in the appropriate channel interrupt routine.
The JSR ensures that the current state of the program counter
is saved.

Each channel interrupt routine (mnemonic name, CHANn, where n is
the channel number) consists of three separate routines:

   CHn       The contents of the program counter is saved in
             location CHn.  CHn+l contains a JRST to the first
             device service routine in the interrupt chain.

   SAVCHn    The routine to save the contents of a specified
             number of accumulators.  It is called from the 
             device service routines with a JSR.

   XITCHn    The routine to restore saved accumulators.  Device
             service routines exit to XITCHn with a POPJ PDP,
             if SAVCHn was previously called.


7.6.2  Interrupt Chains

Each device routine contains a device interrupt routine DEVINT
where DEV is the three-letter mnemonic for the device concerned.
This routine checks to determine whether an interrupt was
caused by device DEV.  The interrupt chain of a given channel
is a designation for the logical positioning of each device
interrupt routine associated with that channel.

The monitor flow of control on the interrupt level through a
chain is illustrated below.  Channel 5 is used in the example.

Monitor Routine          Relevant Code          Explanation
---------------          -------------          -----------

Absolute         52/JSR CH5                ;control transferred here
Locations        53/                       ;on interrupt

CHAN5            CH5: 0                    ;contents of PC saved here
                    JRST PTPINT            ;control transfers to first
                                           ;link in interrupt chain

                 PTPINT: CONSO PTP,PTPDON  ;if PTP done bit is on,
PTPSER              JRST LPTINT            ;PTP was cause of interrupt -
                         .                 ;otherwise, go to next device.

                 LPTINT: CONSO LPT,LPTLOV+LPTERR+LPTDON
LPTSER              JEN  CH5               ;three possible bits may
                         .                 ;indicate that LPT caused
                         .                 ;interrupt.


When a real-time device is added to the interrupt chain (CONSO
skip chain) by a RTTRP UUO (refer to Paragraph 8.3), the device
is added to the front of the chain.  After putting a real-time
device on Channel 5 in single mode (refer to Paragraph 8.3),
the chain is as follows:

Monitor Routine        Relevant Code              Explanation
----,,---------        -------------              -----------

Absolute         52/JSR CH5               ;control transferred here
Locations        53/                      ;on interrupt

CHAN5            CH5: 0                   ;contents of PC saved hwer
                    JRST RDTINT           ;control transfers to first
                                          ;link in interrupt chain.

RTDEV            RTDINT: CONSO RTD,BITS
                    JRST PTPINT
                    JRST (context switcher and
                         dispatch for real-time
                         interrupts).

                 PTPINT: CONSO PTP,PTPDON  ;if PTP done bit is on,
PTPSER              JRST LPTINT            ;PTP was cause of interrupt -
                         .                 ;otherwise, go to next device.

                 LPTINT:CONSO LPT, LPTVOL+LPTERR+LPTDON
LPTSER              JEN  CH5               ;three possible bits may
                         .                 ;indicate that LPT caused
                         .                 ;interrupt.


After putting a real-time device on Channel 5 in normal block
mode (refer to Paragraph 8.3), the chain is as follows:

Monitor Routine          Relevant Code          Explanation
---------------          -------------          -----------

Absolute         52/JSR CH5                ;control transferred here
Locations        53/                       ;on interrupt.

CHAN5            CH5: 0                    ;contents of PC saved here
                   JRST RTDINT             ;control transfers to first
                                           ;link in interrupt chain.

RTDEV            RTDINT:CONSO RTD,BITS
                   JRST PTPINT
                   BLKI RTD,POINTR
                   JRST (context switcher)
                   JEN  CH5

                 PTPINT:CONSO PTP,PTPDON   ;if PTP done bit is on,
PTPSER             JRST LPTINT             ;PTP was cause of interrupt
                       .                   ;otherwise, go to
                        .                  ;next device

                 LPTINT:CONSO LPT,LPTLOV+LPTERR+LPTDON
LPTSER             JEN  CH5                ;three possible bits may
                        .                  ;indicate that LPT caused
                        .                  ;interrupt.
    
#Nú