                    ALTERNATE FOR PAGE 5



FILE OPENING AND CLOSING

     FET has 10 software channels which can be associated
with files.  Only one of these channels can be looked at
at one time.  That is, only one channel can be defined as
the current channel.  The cell designated as semicolon X (;X)
always contains the current channel number.  Changing the
value of this cell changes the current channel.  The commands
listed below open and close files with the aid of the channels
just described.  In each command shown below, the channel is
specified by e which is any expression as defined under
PRELIMINARY INFORMATION.

[e];U file name  C.R.

where I is "Input" abbreviated; opens the specified file
associated with the specified cahnnel as read only.

[e];U file name  C.R.

where U is "Update" abbreviated; opens the specified file
associated with the specified channel as read/write.

[e];C file name  C.R.

where C is "Create" abbreviated; creates the specified file
associated with the specified channel if the file is new; or
opens the file as read/write if it is an old file; or deletes
the contents of the file if it is an old file.

[e]%C file name C.R.

where C is "Close" abbreviated; closes the specified file
associated with the specified bench.  If e is omitted, 
this command closes all files.


                    ALTERNATE FOR PAGES 6 & 7


[e];F  C.R.

where F is "Flush" abbreviated.  If e is omitted, this
command flushes all associated channels.  Normally,
data is buffered to and from the disc and flushing causes
this buffered data to be written.

     Omittimg e when typing any command in the preceding list
which opens files has these consequences:

     1.  Software channel 0 is assumed.

     2.  The command to open a file which has already
         been opened will close that file.

     3.  After a file is opened, the beginning cell
         address for searches is initialized to 0 and
         the ending cell address for searches is 
         initialized to the address of the last word
         in the file.

     4.  The address of the end-of-file for the current
         software channel is initialized to the number
         of words in the file.

     5.  The file being opened will be associated with
         the current software channel.

     Any command in the preceding list closes any opened
cell.
