  4
    56  2379
  2380  5344
  5345 12548
 12549 15680




                           #PRINT CAPABILITIES


#PRINT is a very flexible program for printing symbolic files.  It in-
corporates the good features of previous programs of this type and goes
on to include many new features.  #PRINT has the following capabilities:

       1.  A title (automatically centered) may be specified.

       2.  Number of characters per line may be specified.

       3.  Number of lines per page may be specified.

       4.  Output may be double spaced.

       5.  Lines whose length is longer than the specified maximum are
           folded, i.e., continued on the succeeding line.  There is no
           limit to the length of a line on a file.  Thus, #PRINT may be
           used to look at long symbolic random files having no carriage
           returns.

       6.  System number is printed on page 1.

       7.  Name of file being listed is printed on every page.

       8.  File checksum is computed and printed on page 1.

       9.  Printout can be "BY PAGE", causing a pause before a new page
           is begun.  This permits listings on good grade single sheets o
&:f
           typewriter paper.

      10.  Each page may be numbered at top or bottom.

      11.  Blank spaces or null characters may be automatically inserted
           before each line: Blank spaces will help 1030 terminal users 
           avoid character deletions when using a 3-hole punch.  Null
           characters are useful for teletypes that tend to "bounce" on a
           carriage return.

      12.  One character may be substituted for another.  This allows, 
           for example, an escape character to be sent to your terminal
           in place of a backslash (\) for those users of terminals
           utilizing escape sequences.

      13.  The top and bottom margins of a page may be specified.

      14.  Control characters may be echoed (control-a can print as &A).

      15.  Page separation may be indic`ated by any character, or no
           character (normally a dot).

      16.  Almost all the above features have a default mode, which may
           be easily reversed.

      17.  Commands specifying the format of the printout may be given at
           command level or stored on a file.  Thus a group may be
           referred to by one statement.




.


.



The RUN command may be used to start the program.
The QUIT command should be used to return to executive level.

Other "Standard Front End" commands are: HELP, CAPABILITIES, IN-
STRUCTIONS, SAMPLE, VERSION, CREDITS, CHARGES.

Other commands to this program are:

Command              Default                  Meaning
-------              -------                  -------
"title"              no title  Specifies optional title to  printout

LIST                    -      Lists status of all options that may
                               be specified

ON file-name        TELETYPE   Output is to go to file called file-name

LOL (or WIDTH) n       70      Specifies length of line as n characters

LINES (or LENGTH) n    66      Specifies length of page as n lines

DATE <zone>            YES     Print date and time, using optional
                               time zone  (default zone is PST)

SYSTEM                 YES     Print system number on page 1

FILENAME               YES     Print filename on every page

CHECKSUM               YES     Print checksum of file on page 1

KEEPHEAD               NO      Also print heading on pages following 
                               page 1

DOUBLE                 NO      Use double spacing

BY PAGE                NO      Pause, ring bell, and wait for carriage
                               return before beginning to print a page

TOF <Speed ratio>      NO      Causes top-of-form character (control-L)
                               to be sent in order to advance to a new
                               page

PAGE (TOP or BOTTOM) BOTTOM    TOP puts page numbers on top right corner
                               of pages following page 1, in place of
                               time (i.e., 9/17/71  Page 4 of 16)
                               BOTTOM centers them on last line of page
                               (e.g., -5-)

INSERT n SPACES        NO      Causes n spaces to be inserted at begin-
                               ning of every line

INSERT n NULLS         NO      Causes n nulls to be inserted at beginning
                               of every line

SUBSTITUTE n m         NO      Substitutes character number n in place of
                               character number m

INITIALIZE             --      Set all specifications to initial state

USING                  --      Carries out all commands in file file-name


.


                                                          Page 2 of 2  



Any of the above printing options may be "turned off" by preceeding the 
command/option with one of the following words:

                     NO
                     NOT
                     DONT
                     DON'T
                     DO NOT

Any line may be edited through use of all the line editing characters
available in EDITOR.  For example, control-A is used to delete the
previously typed character.















































.


.



                           #PRINT INSTRUCTIONS


This program is command oriented.  Respond to every "ready" symbol
(a colon) with a command word or phrase.  Type HELP for a list of the
commands you may use.

Every command that involves a specification has a default value.  For
example, the length of the page is set to 66 lines (11 inches) 
initially, but this may be set to other lengths by the command LENGTH,
as shown below:

               LENGTH 37

Some specifications are either activated or not.  Single spacing is
normal, but double spacing may be specified by the command

               DOUBLE

These on/off specifications may be de-activated by preceeding them
with one of the following words:

       NO   NOT   DONT   DON'T   DO NOT

For example, to return to single spacing the user may type:

               DONT DOUBLE       or        NO DOUBLE


TITLE
-----

A Title may be specified by surrounding it with double quotes at com-
mand level.  It will be centered and placed at the top of page 1.  It
will not appear on succeeding pages unless the KEEPHEAD command is
given.  The second double quote may be left off.  A Title may be del-
eted by simply making it null.


CHECKSUM
--------

The checksum that normally gets printed below the file name is the same
as that generated by the Executive CHECKSUM command.  It provides
assurance that a listing of a file has not become obsolete or changed.


LENGTH OF LINE
--------------

The LOL or WIDTH command specifies the maximum number of print positions
per line.  Longer lines are folded onto the next line.  Folding is in-
dicated by a folded line beginning with the two character sequence &: .
There is no limit to the length of a line on a file to be printed, i.e.,
the program can handle lines thousands of characters long.


DATE
----



.


                                                          Page 2 of 4  


The date includes the date and time.  Time is normally in PST.  Other
time zones (MST, CST, EST) may be specified as modifiers to the DATE
command.  They not only cause the appropriate hour adjustment, but
also the day, month, and year if need be.


BY PAGE
-------

At times, one may want to pause before printing a page.  This may 
occur if the output is going to single 8 1/2 x 11 inch sheets that must
be inserted in the terminal, or if the output is to a CRT terminal and
a hard copy is to be made.  In these cases, simply specify BY PAGE.
(The space between words is necessary).  The program will then stop
just before a page is to be started and a bell will ring.  When ready
to proceed, type a carriage return.  To cancel this option, simply
specify NOT BY PAGE at command level.


INSERT
------

Some terminals (1030, etc.) begin each line close to the left margin.
This is bothersome when one wants to use a three hole punch and insert
the pages in a notebook.  The punched holes will eradicate characters,
thus deleting information.  The INSERT command may be given to insert
spaces before every line, as:

               INSERT 5 SPACES

Some teletypes have the problem of garbling the first few characters
on a line.  The small time allowed for the printhead to return to pos-
ition one aggravates this condition.  This may often be cleared up by
inserting null characters before every line.  This in turn is accom-
plished by the INSERT command, as:

               INSERT 3 NULLS

The INSERT command may be used to insert spaces or nulls, but not
both.

The command may be turned off by either inserting zero spaces (or nulls)
or by specifying DONT INSERT.


SUBSTITUTE
----------

Certain terminals require an escape sequence of characters to activate
their various functions.  For example, when a model-37 Teletype receives
an escape character followed by the numeral 3, it shifts to a red
ribbon.  Unfortunately, the EDITOR cannot be used to place an escape
character on a file.  In this case, use an alternate character and have
#PRINT substitute an escape for this character.  The SUBSTITUTE command
may be used to accomplish this.  For example, to substitute an escape
for a backslash (\), type:

               SUBSTITUTE 123 60


.


                                                          Page 3 of 4  



meaning, "substitute character 123 for character 60".  These are 
internal decimal representations of the characters.  Only one substit-
ute command may be in effect at a time.

The substitution may be ignored by typing:

               DONT SUBSTITUTE


FILE STORED COMMANDS
--------------------

Not every user will want the standard options provided by the program.
As was shown above, options are easily changed.  Certain terminals may
require a group of specifications, such as Beta terminals.  These
specifications may be stored on a file and executed by one command, 
USING (or DO).  For example, a wide carriage terminal might use the
following file commands:

               LOL 98
               LENGTH 37
               TOF
               "THIS IS A TITLE"

If these four lines were stored on file BETA, they could be executed
by:

               USING BETA        or        DO BETA


TOP-OF-FORM
-----------

Some terminals have the capability of quickly advancing to the top of
the next page when a top-of-form character (control-L) is received.
The #PRINT program normally indicates page separation by a period in
position one.   If the TOF command is issued, a control-L is sent 
immediately after the last printed line on a page.

Some terminals top-of-form, or form-feed, faster than others.  This 
finite time may have to be taken into consideration.  This may be done
by specifying the relative speed of form-feeding as compared to line-
feeding.  For example:

               TOF 2

means that a terminal form-feeds twice as fast as it line feeds.

Note that this action only occurs at a page separation.  The capabil-
ity also exists to force a top of page by inserting a control-L within
the text to be printed.  This will occur even if TOF is not in effect.


PAGE (TOP or BOTTOM)
-----------

Normally, pagination is done at the bottom of a page.  if PAGE TOP is


.


                                                          Page 4 of 4  


specified, paging is done at the upper right part of the page.  In 
this case, the page information replaces the date and time information
on all pages following the first page.  Furthermore, the final number
of pages is also included, as:

               9/29/71   Page 5 of 12

This means the output must be re-scanned to fill in the final page
numbers, and that if terminal output is specified, all output must
first go to a file and then to the terminal.  Thus, a short wait is in-
volved.

PAGE BOTTOM is the default spec, and causes page numbers to be 
centered and printed two blank lines after the last line of text.
Dashes surround the page number.


ABORTIONS AND EDITING
---------------------

At any time the program may be aborted by striking the escape/alt mode
key.  Control is returned to command level.

The preceding character may be deleted with control-A.  Furthermore,
all the EDITOR line editing characters are available for editing
the input line.


































.


.



                               SAMPLE RUN



:"PRINT CAPABILITIES"

:LOL 65


:LINES 25


:RUN

 File to be printed: PRINTCAP
.



                       PRINT CAPABILITIES


System: C12
File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST
Checksum: 20530776


#PRINT is a very flexible program for printing symbolic files.  I
&:t in-
corporates the good features of previous programs of this type an
&:d goes
on to include many new features.  #PRINT has the following capabi
&:lities:

       1.  A title (automatically centered) may be specified.


                              -1-


.


File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST



       2.  Number of characters per line may be specified.

       3.  Number of lines per page may be specified.

       4.  Output may be double spaced.

       5.  Lines whose length is longer than the specified maximu
&:m are
           folded, i.e., continued on the succeeding line.  There
&: is no
           limit to the length of a line on a file.  Thus, #PRINT
&: may be
           used to look at long symbolic random files having no c


.


                                                          Page 2 of 3  




                              -2-


.


File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST


&:arriage
           returns.

       6.  System number is printed on page 1.

       7.  Name of file being listed is printed on every page.

       8.  File checksum is computed and printed on page 1.

       9.  Printout can be "BY PAGE", causing a pause before a ne
&:w page
           is begun.  This permits listings on good grade single 
&:sheets of
           typewriter paper.


                              -3-


.


File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST



      10.  Each page may be numbered at top or bottom.

      11.  Blank spaces or null characters may be automatically i
&:nserted
           before each line: Blank spaces will help 1030 terminal
&: users 
           avoid character deletions when using a 3-hole punch.  
&:Null
           characters are useful for teletypes that tend to "boun
&:ce" on a
           carriage return.

      12.  One character may be substituted for another.  This al


                              -4-


.




.


                                                          Page 3 of 3  


File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST


&:lows, 
           for example, an escape character to be sent to your te
&:rminal in
           in place of a backslash (\) for those users of termina
&:ls
           utilizing escape sequences.

      13.  Almost all the above features have a default mode, whi
&:ch may
           be easily reversed.

      14.  Commands specifying the format of the printout may be 
&:given at
           command level or stored on a file.  Thus a group may b


                              -5-


.


File: PRINTCAP                    September 30, 1971  3:50 pm PST


&:e
           referred to by one statement.














                              -6-


.



:QUIT


-





.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           