
                            SPECIFICATIONS
                                FOR A
                        VARIAN 620I ASSEMBLER


     This assembler will translate an ascii source file of symbolic
instructions and data into binary instructions and data as a disc
file.  This object file can be put on magnetic or paper tape for
transfer to the Varian itself.

     It will run on a PDP-10 and be written in SIMPL under the
TYMCOM X monitor.

     Character set:

     A - Z    0 - 9

     : ;   =

     #     &  '   ( ) * + , - . /

     CARRET

     Statement Format:

          As many as four fields:

          1)  Label field
          2)  Opcode field
          3)  Parameter field
          4)  Comment field
     
          can make up a statement.

     These are separated by a SPACE (one or more blanks or tabs
(control I's)).  The label begins in the 1st column of a state-
ment.  If it has no label, and is not a DATA statement, it must
start with a SPACE.  If the 1st non-blank character is a DIGIT
(0-9), PLUS (+) or MINUS (-), the statement generates one word
of data.


     The label must start with a LETTER (A-Z), and can have nine
more LETTERS or DIGITS.

     The OPCODE field contains mnemonics for Varian instructions
and assembler directives.  It is from 1 to 5 LETTERs long.

     The PARAMETER field contains expressions made up of
symbols, (labels), constants, operators, and commas.  It is
followed by a SPACE.

     The COMMENT field starts after this SPACE and can be any
string of characters except a SEMI colon (;) or CARRET (carriage
return) which terminates the statement.

     Constants:

     These DIGIT strings are octal unless followed by the LETTER
D which makes them decimal.

Special Characters:

     COLON (:) anywhere in a statement signifies the start of a
     comment e.g.

            LAB1   HLT   :COMMENT  ;

     SEMI (;) ends a statement

     EQUAL (=) if a symbol is preceded by an EQUAL, a one word
literal containing the value of that symbol is generated.

Thus, LDA  =LAB1 will put a 5 in A if LAB1 is the 5th cell in core.

     QUOTE (') is used after in ASC directive to enclose the
character string

     LEFT  '('  parenthesis
            and
     RIGHT ')'  parenthesis
can be used in the usual way to force precedence in arithmetic
expression evaluation and IF directive logical expressions.

STAR (*)

     In column 1 of a statement, this carries the same meaning as
a COLON, the characters up to the next SEMI or CARRET are a comment.
          Anywhere else in a statement, * is a symbol having the value
of the location counter.  Someday, it may also be the binary 
operator for multiplication.

PLUS (+)

     This will be taken as the binary operator for addition or the
binary operator for positive.

COMMA (,)

     Certain OPCODEs require more than one parameter or expression,
these expressions are spearated by COMMAs in the parameter
field.

MINUS (-)

     It is the binary operator for subtraction or the binary 
operator for negative depending on where it falls, e.g.

     -7D is binary negation
    X-7D is binary subtraction

DOT (.)

     This is a symbol having the value 100000 octal.  It is useful
in turning on the sign bit as in indirect addressing for double
word instructions e.g.

     IMP  BUG+.

SLASH (/)

     Is a binary operator causing the operand preceding it to be
shifted left 8 bits.  Thus,  HALVES  123/+321  would put two 8 bit
values in the halves of the 16 bit Varian word.

CARRET (carriage return)

     Is a terminator for statements.

     Expressions such as:

          X
          Y+Z
          X-*+.+5
          123/321+X

consist of symbols, operators, and constants.  Operations are 
performed left to right.

     NOTE:  Where no ambiguity results, PLUS signs can be
            omitted thus,  X

                           X-*.5
                           123/321X

            are equivalent to the above.

Assembler Directives

     These must appear in the OPCODE field but do not generate
a computer instruction.

1)  L  expression

     indicates the literal pool should start here and the location
counter should be set to it's operand.

2)   I  expression

     means the indirect pool starts here and ends at it's operand.

3)   LAB1  E  LAB2

     says its label should be given the value of it's operand.
LAB1 should be made the same as LAB2.  But LAB1 can be altered
by successive E directives.

4)   R  expression

     resets the location counter to  expression .  A label on an
R directive will have the location counter prior to resetting.

Assembler Directives for Conditional Assembly

    The following four pseudo-ops can be used to allow the assembling of
certain statements and not of others depending on the value of chosen
symbols (usually given values with the E directive).

1)   IF  <logical expression>

2)   ELSEIF  <logical expression>

3)   ELSE

4)   ENDIF

    A conditional sequence of statements must start with an IF directive
and end with an ENDIF, can have one ELSE just before the ENDIF and an
optional number of ELSEIF's before that.  The <logical expression>
is made up of an <arithimetic expression>, a <relational operator>,
and another <arithmetic expression>.
     Statements between the IF and the next IF-type directive
are assembled if the <logical expression> evaluates to true and all
statements following until the ENDIF are not assembled.  If the
<logical expression> evaluates to false, those statemennts between
the IF and the next conditional directive are not assembled.  If this
next directive is an ELSEIF, it's <logical expression> is evaluated
and just like the IF, true will cause assembly of the statements
following and a skip to the ENDIF while false will bring the
next ELSEIF or ELSE into play.  Statements between an ELSE and ENDIF will
be assembled if all the preceding IF's and ELSEIF'S were false.

Thus,

     IF PORTS>16
     NOP   :   PORTS IS > 16
     ELSEIF    CRD201=0
     NOP   :   PORTS IS < 17 AND CRD201 IS = 1
     ELSEIF CORRES=0
     NOP   :   PORTS IS < 17, CRD201 IS # 1, CORRES IS = 0
     ELSE
     NOP   :  PORTS<17, CRD201#1, AND CORRES#0
     ENDIF

     will result in only one of the four NOP's being assembled and it
will have a true comment.

     The relational operators are:

  =  equal to
  >  greater than
  <  less than
  #  not equal to

     The logical operators are:

  &  bitwise and
  !  inclusive or
  ^  exclusive or
  #  not

     the arithmetic operators are:

  +  addition
  -  subtraction
  *  multiplication
  /  division
  _  shift (followed by a positive count goes left, negative goes right)

     Most OPCODEs require one expression in the parameter field.
If indexing or indirect addressing is desired, a second
expression of the following form is needed:

                             By B  By X
     Indexing               5 or B    6 or X

     Post-indexing          5P or BP   6P or XP

     Indirect        7 or I

     The four inter-register commands:

1)   COP     copy
2)   INC     increment
3)   DEC     decrement
4)   COM     complement

have as many as 3 expressions in the parameter field speci-
fiying source, destination, and condition on overflow.

     The 1st two expressions consist of 0 to 3 of the LETTERs
'A', 'B', and 'X' while the 3rd is e.g.

     COP  A,B
     COM AB, X
     DEC ,A
     INC A,A,V

     The VARIAN 620/L computer handbook pages 20-1 through 20-68
describe the instruction set.

     The following OPCODEs generate a one word computer instruction:

                see  # 21-6
                  Type 1 and Type 4

     These OPCODEs generate computer instructions occupying two
consecutive words.

                see  #21-6
                  Types 2, 3, and 5

     Literal character strings

     LDA  =' A'E

LAB1   ASC   C string C :C is any character not in string

'PLEASE LOG IN:'

     A literal constant can appear in an expression.  It is 
enclosed in QUOTEs and followed by A, C, or E to indicate Ascii,
Correspondence, Ebcedic.  The absence of an A, C, or E defaults
to Ascii.

     The first non-blank character of a line being a QUOTE would
generate data words, 2 characters per word.  An odd number of
characters will make the left half of the 1st word zero.  

     In an expression, the value of 'ABCD' is 'CD'.

     If the ASC directive is used, the 1st non-blank character
is the enclosing symbol.  The string ends at the next 
occurence of this character.


     If the assembler

        directive

        NEW IF is included, the directives:

1)   IF      logical expression
2)   ELSE
3)   ENDIF

are interpreted as follows:

     A logical expression is formed as in SIMPL using symbols
and the standard logical operators and parens

                                             BNOT
                               =             BAN
                               =             BOR
            =                  #             BXOR

     e.g.

     IF   MXV + CRD201   0
     JMPM  RIPTR,I
     ENDIF

     IF    A  BAN  (B  BXOR C)#0

Assembler Directive

     NEW ARITH

changes the meaning of SLASH (/) to the binary division operator.
All previous SLASH uses are to be replaced with BACK ( ) for
shifting things to left half and truncating the right half.

     Precedence is normal.  Parens are allowed.  + signs may no
longer be omitted.
 